All right.
So this summer is a little bit bigger than what we're used to but just bear with me.
It's a first topic on the application of derivatives that we cover.
So I want to make sure that we have everything here summarized for you.
So let's start functions can be increasing for some intervals and decreasing for other intervals.
And remember that an interval is a group of x values.
There are some functions however that are only increasing and there are some others that are only decreasing.
But for the most part you'll be dealing with functions that are both increasing for some interval and
decreasing for others.
A function is increasing the y values get bigger as you move from left to right.
So as the x values get bigger the y values also get bigger for an increasing function.
On the other hand a function is decreasing if the Y values get smaller as you move from left to right.
So if you look at the graph from left to right the y values are going down and that is your next point.
If you have a graph then increasing means that the graph is going up and decreasing means that it's
actually going down.
I remember that we always do this as we look at it from left to right.
So it's in the same direction that you're right from left to right.
This is the same way that we look at graphs.
Now you do not always have a graph available so sometimes you have to use derivatives to find the intervals
where a function is increasing and the intervals where it is decreasing.
So using derivatives if a derivative is positive.
In other words if it's greater than zero then the original function is increasing.
On the other hand if a derivative is negative then the original function is decreasing.
Right.
So they go hand-in-hand derivative positive original function increasing derivative negative all original
function decreasing.
Finally if a derivative is zero then the original function is neither increasing or decreasing.
And finally this is the main thing and this is how you're going to solve problems.
This is a three step process that you use to find the intervals of increase and decrease for a function.
So step one is to find the derivative.
You always have to find the derivative.
Step two is to find the values that make the derivative equal to zero and to find the values that make
the derivative undefined.
Remember that this on the step is only done when you have a bottom part of the derivative.
If there is no bottom part there's no fraction.
You only have to find the values that make it equal to zero.
But if there is a fraction then you need to do is find the values that make it equal to zero.
So that means you set the top equal to zero.
And you also have to find the values that make the bottom equal to zero.
That's the undefined part.
And then finally once you have those values and make it equal to zero and undefined you're going to
grab those values.
You can put them in a number line which actually looks something like this
that's called a number line.
And remember like we did in the example for example.
So let's say that there is a zero an X equals 2.
That means we have to test to the left of two and to the right of two.
And so to the left of two we can pick for example 1 and to the right of 2 we can pick for example 3.
So what we do is we take these test values 1 and 3.
And you plug them into the derivative.
So let's say that we plugged into one and he gave us a positive number.
That means that to the left of two the derivative is positive.
Let's say that we plugged that three into the derivative and he gave us a negative number.
So that means that to the right of to a derivative is negative.
This means that for numbers less than two the graph of the original function is increasing because the
derivative is positive and to the rights of to the graph of the original function is decreasing because
a derivative is negative.
Right.
This is pretty much it.
I know it's a lot that we covered but bear with me the more problems you do easier it's going to be
at some point it becomes second nature.
We're going to be like oh ok.
Intervals of increase and decrease.
Let's find a derivative we find the values that make the derivative equals zero and undefined.
And then you plug it into the derivative etc.
All right.
So we'll keep going over some more applications of derivatives and I'll see you in the next tutorial.